This is Debra Beale. I am interviewing Mr. Fred J.
Benson on the history of Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 5th, 1984.
And the other
interview you gave us in the background, we don't
really need to go into that all again, unless you
want to. but I'd like to
know what your first assessment
was of this place. Well, when I first came here as a
graduate student back in 1935 or 1936, the permit
station was the responsibility of Mr. Giske was
the college architect.
Mr. Giske was
very much interested in ventilation and heating
and that sort of thing. They were doing a lot of
research work back then. primarily
on TV and that sort of thing. So you got involved as a
grad student? No, I wasn't particularly involved
in it. I knew about it, but I was quite friendly with
seven guys who were working on it. And we basically
left the university. T.R. Scramps came
in, and he had due respect to the experiment
station, and he was also responsible for the
University's building program. And Mr.
Gilchrist was the Dean of Engineering at the time,
and he was very much interested in freight
rates, in
fact felt that the state of Texas was being
discriminated against, and we established new
freight rates, so we had a rather substantial
project to carry on, so freight rates to and from
the Texas courts destination
and origin in comparison with similar
commodities and similar lengths of trips in other
parts of the country. We also had another fairly
large project in the study of bridges, which was
carried on by Now
the freight
rate study, when did that finally wind down?
Because that went on for years. Yes, it did. I would
guess it probably ended sometime in the early 50s.
And out of that group, Originated
in the group of Belvedere, Illinois, as well as
Texas. That's the same group. And that still
exists. So the industrial survey is what grew out
of the freight rail study? Presumably. If you
really want to pursue that phase of it, you've got
to go talk to Jim Bradford. Go to Jim Bradford.
Potential terms. And I think we started back in
the late
40's around Jim Randall. Were
you involved in TEAS as a professor before? I
really wasn't involved in TEAS directly until
after World War II when we began to do I've
done a fair amount of research work in civil
engineering in the Highway Pavement field. I've
done work with a lot of . In the Highway Pavement,
TTI was established in 55. Was that something that
the state came to the university and said we want?
No, the Transformation
Institute was an idea
of Mr. Gilchrist, who was at that time the
Chancellor, and a man who was for many, many years
the Chief of the Bureau of Public Works, McDonald.
They felt
that there should be more
cooperation between the major universities
in the states and the state power departments to
solve the problem of the climate system. And so
they decided that Texas was a good place to try this
out and see if they could start it here. And
Ms.
Skelter's
got that legislation passed by the legislature,
and it was pretty adept at being in the legislature
back in the early 50s. It was a deal that we did, and
it kind of came about in 1954-55. McDonnell
retired from the Bureau of Public Roads and came
down here and was on our staff for a number of years.
And they
started
the corporate
forum.
And how did you get into
the position of Vice Director of TEAS? Well, I
started out with TTI. It came to me when somebody
younger looked after the business side of this
operation and somebody who was familiar with the
university. system
in the
University of the People. They made me an
executive officer in the Transformation
Institute. I was a professor of civil engineering
there. So I was at the same time an administrator
for the Transformation Institute on half-time
wages. And we
started, essentially,
with nothing. We built that program, and actually
we had a real feud with the Engineering and Sperm
Station, because the Highway Department was
doing a little bit of work through the Engineering
and Sperm Station, and they moved it over to the
Transportation Institute. Art Mello, who was the
advice director of the station, Dean was always
the director, and he was very unhappy about that.
That's
why he left? That was one of the reasons he left. The
real reason he left, I guess, was the fact that he
had gone to Calhoun, and he said, I know, I know. He
was the kind of one who had an aggressive program.
What program? Aggressive program that he was
willing to carry on. And
director Rose, who came right before you? No,
after me. Right, in terms of right before you
became director? No, after me. Oh, okay. The metal
left. Dr. Kalzin came to me and wanted me to take
on
the job of, again, Vice Director of the Experiment
Station along with me and the Executive Officer of
TTI. I didn't really want to do it, but I finally
agreed to it. And I became then the Vice Director of
the Experiment Station and the Executive Officer
of TTI at the same time. John
was, of course, a very aggressive
individual, and they were working on the plans for
the nuclear science center, trying to get it
developed, and closing the loop
and wind tunnel, and affecting a useful piece of
equipment. Then they changed the format of the
general administration here, I
went back to the system organization, which they
had dropped. I got in the team. I was the vice
president for engineering. I forgot what the
title was. And they wanted me to be dean of
engineering, so I became dean of engineering. And
I was always very involved with the team. The
director of the Experiment Station. Was he here at
the University before that? No, he was not. He was
only here about a year back. Well, he wasn't here
very long. I thought it was longer than that
because Mr. Rutter came and in the spring of 58.
He
became dean in December of 57. And Carter became
the vice president. Sometime later, and I don't
remember exactly when it was, they made him
president of the university, kept the system in
resignation, but they moved the experiment
stations and the extension services for
administrative purposes of the university. And
when they did that, Dr. Calhoun essentially got
out of the job. And he went to the Bureau of the
Interior with our science advisor for three or
four years, and then he came back and worked as a
vice chancellor for our parents. Did Rose leave
because of greater pastors or because
of the difference in... He was upset about the
change in military. Was it
a change in the direction he saw T's going? I think
so, yes. He just felt that they were trying not to
continue the same policies that had been followed
So
when
he left,
then Mr. Rudner wanted me to again become Director
of Experiment Center, which I did. From that time
on then, I was responsible for all of the
engineering activities until 1978. That's what a
lot of the sources, most of them said you were
continuously director, but a few things,
including a Houston Post article I saw, said that
Dr. Cahan was director. I was the research
manager. I saw an article that said he was named. I
had much time with the research manager. He was
with the research manager. Much rather didn't
like the way he ran it, so he made me director of it,
too. All for a while. Did they... essentially
become
one administrative organization? The Research
Foundation really is a separate corp for
me. For
a while, he didn't really want fire to go on, so what
he did was to make him the
vice-director or something of the experimental
section in the meeting, something that kind of
eased out. He decided that he wanted to talk about
it, so he might be working on it. It's not a very
similar position. How did President Rutter
change the way he changes policies or goals? Mr.
Rutter wasn't, wasn't one to tell you how to do
things. What he did was give you a job and expect you
to get on with it. As far as the policies were
concerned, he was the only guy that could obey the
rules and get into anybody's hair too much while I
ran suit and set. So
the policies that we had, pretty much the policies
that we developed inside of our engineering
community, between myself and the department.
Did you find that Sputnik and all the signs of the
education bill after launching changed the tease
out of it all, or defunded it?
I would say yes,
it did both. Probably had more effect on funding
than it did on what we were trying to do. After
Sputnik, the federal funding for science and
engineering research and development
increased, so there were a great many more sources
of funds, and the fellows who had ideas had
much more opportunity to get them exported than
they had before them. Back in the early years,
1940s and 1950s, Essentially,
there was very little federal funding available
to normal universities. There were special
activities like the University of California
operations, places like that, MIT, Lincoln
Laboratories. As
far as general funding available, the federal
government doesn't exist. So the early programs
were rather involved entirely on what funds you
could get from the state of Texas and the work that
we did for the private industries of the state and
the highway department, of course, and the TTI
program. That was a very substantial program for
us. The wind tunnel you mentioned earlier, is that
the same wind tunnel they're using now? The wind
tunnel was originally built with a concrete
section that was open to both ends. And the tunnel
at that time had very, very little value. It had
very little control. We got about
the same amount of money out
of the University Community Welfare Fund. and
also put it in the balance system at that time. So
it's been improved over the years, it seems? It's
been improved some since the balance system was
installed back in the 50s. It was originally for
agriculture airplanes. Well, no, it was a general
low speed wind tunnel.
They used it a lot for their aggregate
plane test,
but we used it for other things. The biggest
problem we had at that time was with insertion and
expulsion. But they were more interested in the
problems involved in spraying chemicals
Dispersion solids and that sort of thing. It did
that work with full-scale
airplanes and feet. One of the other research
areas that was big in the 50s but kind of dropped off
was the architectural research in ventilation.
That work was started under Dr. Mello. And
it sensed that he was the brainchild of Bill
Cordell, who was an
architect at that time. And they worked on some of
the same things that Gieske had
worked on. Natural elevation, lighting, they
worked on lighting, they worked on beam. air
conditioning
was just beginning to come in in those days. And
then that program later shifted over and they did a
lot of work
for the
military in the general
area of protection of buildings from radiation
problems in the latter few years. in this area, and
most of that work was classified. That's the
problem. I had to find out a lot of what was going on
in the 60s because so much of the output is
classified. But the work of Caudill and his people
there was actually poor. There's
a lot of reinventing the wheel going on in this
country today. We're going to be going back to St.
Petersburg. And he went in a private... Yes, he and
two other fellows, a member of the staff over
there, one of our graduate students, started an
architectural firm here in Bryan, William Ralph
and Scott,
and they became... from a substantial firm
in a fairly short
period of time, about five, six, eight years. And
then they moved their business to Houston, and
they're still active in Houston now. And Rowlett
are both gone. Wally Scott is still there, as far as
I know. That sort of lost track of the people who did
the, you know, the search work for them. There's
an
awful lot of people to keep track of. Besides
President Rutter, is anyone else, and he was here
for so long during that great spur of development,
is anyone else in terms of President or Chancellor
had a great impact on the re-operation? His impact
being who left you alone to do it. Well, Mr. Rutter,
of course, always said, was
very
supportive of anything that we wanted to do in the
developmental area. And Williams also was
supportive in that respect. He was never
interested in the work that we were doing in the
engineering department. It was his field of
liberal arts. I
didn't know very much about it, but the work
developed quite well in the period when William
was Chancellor. Probably one of the reasons for
that is at that time Calhoun was, or they called
him, they changed the titles all the time, but he
was You
see, Mr. Rutter and Dr. Williams were both
Chancellor and President of the California Board
of Supervisors. I think they called the Calhoun
Dean of the Faculty. Maybe he was the Vice
President later. Anyway, he had the same job as
Eaton and Phillips put together. And
were there any big, your other interview you said
that the 70s was a time of organizing all that had
been done in the 60s and just developing that
further. Were there any big new projects that you
were thinking about in the 70s?
Well,
in the
70s, of course, we started the space program. I
guess in the 70s, we primarily developed our
remote sensing program in the 70s. Was there any of
the space program in the 60s? There probably was
some. I think probably the big development in the
space program was late 60s, early 70s.
We
started our solid-state electronics program. I
guess, again, we began that in the 60s with the
major development in that arena within the 70s.
And the transportation is due, of course. We began
our highway safety program. And again, that was
started back in the early to middle 60s, I guess. it
probably made
its greatest advances in the 70s.
Since then, what happened in the 70s, a lot of what
we had started earlier, more or less, came with
maturity. Did you have, most of the 60s were
contracted? Most of everything was contracted.
So were the findings Besides
those
things that were classified for defense reasons,
there wasn't much that wasn't classified? There
wasn't much that was classified. The only thing
that I can remember is doing the classified arena
after the work that we were doing on radiation was
in geophysics. and
quite a lot of classified work in geophysics in
terms of the detection of nuclear attacks. We did
only a very, very small amount of classified work.
The biggest thing was the steady growth of the
program. When
I started, I guess it was in the late 50s. It was
probably 250. When I left, I guess it was quite
early. I don't remember the exact date. Was
most
of the 60s
government contract or private industry
contract? Most of the 60s government contract.
Did that change any in the 70s? Generally
speaking, we did more work in private industry in
the 70s than we had in the 60s. And then we began to
also emphasize our relations with industry, both
from the standpoint of the research teaching
program so that we could make our program more
sensitive
to the real world. Was there a particular time
period that this was an administrative decision
to be delayed, or was this
for them? Well, I think we probably decided in
roughly 1970 that this was the direction in which
we ought to go. And we also, of course, decided that
engineering would probably move
in the same way
the law of medicine had, we would have essentially
separate schools. That would be a mistake because
I don't think it would happen. At least as far as our
policies are concerned, they would be pointed in
that direction. Based on that point. When did
interdisciplinary research
I don't
remember.
But must have
come here in 58 or 59. So I would guess we started the
Interdisciplinary Research Program in the
1960s. And of course, it always had a rocky path. It
still does to a large extent. Universities remain
to this day. Apartments
are too much for the shops, they don't talk to each
other. And it's very difficult to cross those
barriers. I've never quite understood why. Even
in engineering it's sometimes difficult between
mechanical, electrical, electrical, and
industrial or civil mechanics.
Is
there a particular period in the
history of tea since you've been here that you
consider to be the low period? Well, the lowest
period, as far as I'm concerned, is when I first
started. We didn't have much program, and we
didn't have very many people in there who were
interested in research. Are
there Any
projects that you remember, any pet projects that
you think should have been pursued in one of those?
There were many over the years you would love to do.
Well, there were lots of things that we would like
to have done, but we couldn't find the support to do
them. I don't know, several deaths. I've got the
idea for instance. One of the
solutions to the water
problem here in Texas might be building the major
nuclear reactors on the coast and use the salt
water for cooling and evaporate the salt water and
evaporate the water. To me, that's a fascinating
scheme. I'm looking forward to it. Is
that the 60s? Yes, we were on that end of the 60s. We
were on that end of the 60s. But here again, this was
all we did, which was preliminary studies on this.
It became obvious that we were going to go against
federal government.
He operates
on the charter that's in the legislation
that created it. And as far as I know, that's the
only The guidelines that it has are very general.
Now,
the key is the subject of all
the rules and regulations of the university
system. Essentially, its job is to do research,
which is important for the state of Texas, and
which will support the Texas economy and support
the engineering activity and other activities
here at the university. What do you think the role
of TEAS is in terms of education? Well, the role of
TEAS in education is to provide the faculty with
opportunities to engage in research in which
they're interested or to engage in these projects
of interdisciplinary nature in which they may not
be so interested.
We use that to support
graduate
students and build up the faculty confidence and
build up the store of the world of information on
how we do things. And how do you feel teaching is
responsible to disseminate the information?
Well, certainly it has a responsibility to
disseminate. the information
and the question always is, how is this to be done?
That's the most difficult job of all. You've got to
get the information that you've developed out.
You can do this through saying that your people get
to technical meetings where their colleagues
will know what they're doing here and publishing
articles and research reports books, all sorts of
things.
I don't think that there were any years that I
hadn't gone and built a book program, but we did a
very good job and felt that was one of our weak
links. It's been hard for me trying to pull the
history together with a few publications, but I
noticed that Lewis
Horne, who apparently was... Lewis Horne came to
work for a man who was a vice director before me. No.
When he switched to TTI, he said everything kind of
dropped off and everything. Get another man like
him.
The
decision was made at that time. The department had
felt that it was better for their people to publish
in the open literature than it was for us to
continue this series in which we published many of
ourselves in our publications. I'm not so sure,
but that was a wise decision. When you do that, the
material becomes very scattered. Nobody
takes
responsibility for seeing
that you have copies of the veil, that sort of
thing. And I just doubt that that is as effective as
the old bulletin circuitry. But then again, I
don't know. It does not like me. In the 1972
bulletin, there was another effort with the
change in attitude in the 70s to take a new
responsibility. In 1972? It
was just a general news bulletin you sent out to
industry and researchers. That was probably
more in the order of an advertising piece to try to
get more support from industry. really
dissimilar type of thing. Oh, it's not technical,
of course, in any sense, but it was kind of, we have
some of this, and if you want it, we'll get it. When
I, I mean, Dr. Porter, who took my place, this is one
of the things that I told you that you should work
on. I think you've done a pretty good job. I think
you did a much better job now. We were doing a much
better job. Did
the Vietnam War have much of
an effect on the direction some of your research
was going? Really not. We never did get involved in
classified work in 1944. Some of our people did.
Some of our people worked in classified programs.
They did this route just like Sam did.
As
far as the station is concerned, I don't remember
anything. What about the strategic? Center for
Strategic Technology? That came later. That was
an idea that Dr. Thomas and I had, and I think that
idea probably surfaced sometime
along
in the early or middle 70s. There were, of course, a
large number of these think tanks around the
country which had influenced the policy of like
the minor corporations, grand corporations,
like that. And these groups were either on the east
coast or on the west coast. And we felt, by and
large,
that
many of their studies were highly biased by their
geographic location. And that there was room for a
group which was really, had people in it who
thought somewhat differently. And this was a good
place for our panel. So we started out, got this
approved by the board, and it was up and coming.
been operating
for about five or six years, and we are now
beginning to have pretty substantial growth. The
food protein program, is that out of the cotton
seed? That's out of the old cotton seed products
library. The Cotton Committee of Texas back
somewhere in, oh, I guess in the late 30s, to
convince
the
state of Texas that they
ought to
put in a parachute program in cotton. So they
essentially
divided that program into four units. The unit
concerned with the use of cotton and the
production of cotton crops along with the Texas
Tech. Work on privacy was done here. The work on
clothing and so on was done at what was then the
Texas State College for Women in Denton. And the
University of Texas had a very small program in the
economic school. And programs don't very much
exist that way. Spinning work and so on is still all
done at Tech. The cottonseed work is done here. And
the work on the use of cotton primarily in women's
clothing is done up at, what do we call it now? TSCW?
TW. TW. That's where I got my master's. And they
produce some real beautiful things. But
we changed the program. We changed the program and
made it much broader than that. They now work with
all kinds of .
Essentially, the thrust of that program today is
to develop local sources of . That was developed
in the 60s, that expanded. Right. It was really
gone under way when
we brought Carl into it. I think he came probably
somewhere
in the late 60s. The fan test. It's been here
forever. Fan testing was a part of the Easton
program. I talked about that first. And since he
was interested in ventilation and movement of
air, it was pretty much natural for them to develop
interest in performance of fans. And so we got some
people over in the engineering department to work
on this. And out of the work that they did,
developed really the Fan Manufacturers
Association in this country. And this laboratory
which does the official fan tests and provides
them with the information that they use in their
advertisements.
So where it started out to be a research
laboratory, and in its early years, Did a lot of fun
about
researching fans. It is now a, I guess you would
call it a regulatory factory. And produces, tests
the fans and makes sure that the manufacturer's
claims are. It's like a good housekeeping team.
Yeah. Same thing for the fans. Except we
do it all. The fan
manufacturers
don't even bother to do their own tests now. They
send their fans in here and we make them make up the
tables for them. It's a cheaper reading for each
one of them. They have very fine stuff to sell. It
has expanded some to consider fan noises and other
elements of the system. But essentially
it's a measurement
laboratory. Although they know a lot about moving
air. The cyclotron has always been interesting.
A
cyclotron was really sort of
a funny, funny thing. Mr. Rutter called me up one
day after a hot July day and said, I want you to go to
Houston with me and talk to the Browns Foundation
about cyclotrons. I knew barely what a cyclotron
was. But
we got in the car and
went down and talked to the Welch Foundation, the
Welch Foundation people. And they decided they
would provide a million dollars for construction
of the cyclotron. And they wanted A&M to take on the
responsibility of getting the rest of the money
and getting it built and getting it in operation.
So
when we got back, we heard from the other fellows
who were in the field who were studying in the US.
And they were smiling where I could get any
attention. And we were looking at our salary,
which at that time was going to cost, I think, about
$300,000. All we had was better knowledge from the
Welsh Foundation. And Mr. Rutter was pretty sure
that he'd get the board to match that, but he didn't
think he'd get any more than that, so that's too
many numbers. And my people said, well, the best
people. And cyclotrons of the size that we were
planning to build are located at Lawrence
Radiation Lab in Berkley. So we got the man who
built their 88-inch cyclotron. to
come here
and advise us how we should proceed and give us some
ideas of what we would do with the costs and
operational expenses and that sort of thing. And
we did a report from Mr. Rudder and the board and
they decided they wanted to go on with it if we could
raise the money. The Welch Foundation people had
done some preliminary work with the At that time Al
Ludeke was
the general manager of the Atomic Energy
Commission and one of our graduates of course. So
we went to Pierce, who was their research manager,
and he encouraged us to go on. And he essentially
was responsible, I expect, along with Ludeke. for
getting the additional money put in the federal
budget for us to build this type of thing. Now,
after all of the legwork of the...